PR 3 of n: Add ML notebook on cluster validation (#260)
AlexsLemonade/training-modules: machine-learning/02-openpbta_consensus_clustering.Rmd

# Set seed for reproducible UMAP results
set.seed(2020)
# umap() expects features (genes) to be columns, so we have to use t()
umap_results <- umap::umap(t(rnaseq_mat[high_variance_index, ]))
```

The UMAP coordinates are in the `layout` element of the list returned by `umap::umap()`.

```{r make_umap_df, live = TRUE}
# Make a data frame of the layout results and join with molecular subtype 
# data frame
umap_plot_df <- data.frame(umap_results$layout) %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Kids_First_Biospecimen_ID") %>%
  inner_join(mb_molecular_subtype_df)
```

Let's make a scatter plot and color our samples by the subtype labels.

```{r umap_scatter}
umap_plot_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = X1, 
             y = X2,
             color = molecular_subtype)) +
  geom_point() +
  colorblindr::scale_color_OkabeIto() +
  theme_bw() +
  xlab("UMAP1") +
  ylab("UMAP2")
```

### PCA 

Now, we'll briefly show you how to use built-in functions for PCA on any matrix that's not in a specialized object for some kind of genomic data.

```{r run_pca}
# Like umap(), prcomp() expects the features to be columns
pca_results <- prcomp(t(rnaseq_mat[high_variance_index, ]), 
                      scale = TRUE)

> # The low-dimensional representation is returned in x

Reviewer: I was looking at this in the rendered notebook, so while this is not my full review, I noticed this comment mostly because the `head()` still prints a whole lot. Technically, PCA has the same dimensionality, we just throw some away after calculating them. `calculatePCA()` does this by default, so that may be what they expect, but you might want to mention that `prcomp()` does not (unless you set `tol`), so the output matrix has the same dimensions as the input. 

At least that is my understanding!

Reviewer: In any case, you might want to use `pca_results[1:6, 1:6]` or something similar to reduce the printout.

Author: Sounds good 👍  `calculatePCA()` returns the first 50 PCs based on my read.

             y = X2,
             color = molecular_subtype)) +
  geom_point() +
  colorblindr::scale_color_OkabeIto() +
  theme_bw() +
  xlab("UMAP1") +
  ylab("UMAP2")
```

### PCA 

Now, we'll briefly show you how to use built-in functions for PCA on any matrix that's not in a specialized object for some kind of genomic data.

```{r run_pca}
# Like umap(), prcomp() expects the features to be columns
pca_results <- prcomp(t(rnaseq_mat[high_variance_index, ]), 
                      scale = TRUE)
# The low-dimensional representation is returned in x
pca_results$x[1:6, 1:6]
```

Let's get the first 10 PCs ready for plotting.

```{r pca_df, live = TRUE}
pca_plot_df <- data.frame(pca_results$x[, 1:10]) %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Kids_First_Biospecimen_ID") %>%
  inner_join(mb_molecular_subtype_df)
```

And now make a scatterplot.

```{r pca_scatter, live = TRUE}
pca_plot_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = PC1, 
             y = PC2,
             color = molecular_subtype)) +
  geom_point() +
  colorblindr::scale_color_OkabeIto() +
  theme_bw() +
  xlab("PC1") +
  ylab("PC2")
```

[`plotly`](https://plotly.com/r/) is a package that allows us to plot interactive 3D scatterplots.

> ```{r 3d_scatter}

Author: Commit messages never lie

pca_3d_plot <- plot_ly() %>%
  add_trace(data = pca_plot_df,
            x = ~ PC1,
            y = ~ PC2,
            z = ~ PC3,
            mode = "markers",
            type = "scatter3d",
            color = ~ molecular_subtype,

>             colors = colorblindr::palette_OkabeIto[1:4])

Reviewer: If we are doing this, can we simplify it a bit? I'm not sure whether `add_trace()` is needed based on https://plotly.com/r/3d-scatter-plots/ It seems like we might be able to do this with something like the following, which is maybe more similar to ggplot syntax?
```
pca_3d_plot <- plot_ly(data = pca_plot_df,
                       x = ~ PC1,
                       y = ~ PC2,
                       z = ~ PC3,
                       color = ~ molecular_subtype,
                       colors = colorblindr::palette_OkabeIto[1:4],
                       mode = "markers",  # is this needed? not sure
                       type = "scatter3d"  # same here, does it automatically infer 3d? probably, but explicit is fine
                       ) %>%
  add_markers()
```

Author: Specifying `mode` and `type` avoids warnings that I thought could be potentially confusing (not sure how `add_markers()` fits in). I had trouble specifying `x`, etc. in the `plot_ly()` call but I think I was missing `~` when I tried that at first. I can take another look. 

This is probably not a good idea, but what about multiple 2D plots _and_ this 3D plot?

Reviewer: TIMTOWTDI

I think `add_markers()` is more like `geom_point()` where `add_trace()` is a more general thing that can do lines too?

We'll use the package [`ConsensusClusterPlus`](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/ConsensusClusterPlus.html) that we loaded up top.

The consensus clustering methodology was first introduced in [Monti et al. _Machine Learning_. 2003.](https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1023949509487)

Consensus clustering is one way to help you determine the number of clusters in your data, but it is not the only methodology available. 
Check out the [Data Novia course _Cluster Validation Essentials_ by Alboukadel Kassambara](https://www.datanovia.com/en/courses/cluster-validation-essentials/) for a deeper dive.

```{r consensus_clustering}
cc_results <- ConsensusClusterPlus(rnaseq_mat,
                                   maxK = 15,
                                   # Setting this seed is necessary for the 
                                   # results to be reproducible
                                   seed = 2020,
                                   innerLinkage = "average",
                                   finalLinkage = "average",
                                   distance = "pearson")
```

> It seems like there are 3 main stable clusters from the consensus clustering results.

Reviewer: I feel like we are missing a bit of explanation of the expected output here. A bit more context about how you concluded 3 clusters might also be useful for people coming back to the notebook.

# table() creates a contingency table of counts
# 
table(cc_results[[9]]$consensusClass)
```

(Note: the numbering of the clusters is arbitrary here.)

**Let's consider clusters 1, 3, and 4 for further analysis.**
But first, we'll save the entirety of the consensus clustering results to file.

```{r save_cc_results, live = TRUE}
# Write consensus clustering results to file
write_rds(cc_results, path = cc_results_file)
```

And now to extract the samples in the clusters of interest.
What we used `table()` on before is actually a named vector.

```{r extract_cluster_labels}
cc_cluster_labels <- cc_results[[9]]$consensusClass
head(cc_cluster_labels)
```

We'll extract the names (biospecimen IDs) for samples in clusters 1, 3, and 4, which contain the majority of samples.

```{r sample_names}
sample_index <- which(cc_cluster_labels %in% c(1, 3, 4))
samples_in_clusters <- names(cc_cluster_labels)[sample_index]
```

Check what proportion of total samples are in one of these three clusters.

```{r proportion_in_clusters}
# number of samples that met our logical criterion above divided by total 
# number of samples
length(sample_index) / length(cc_cluster_labels)
```

> And now we'll filter the RNA-seq matrix.

Reviewer: Are we choosing to ignore samples that don't cluster? If so, we should justify this?

Author: Only for the silhouette value calculations because doing that for a cluster of 1 sample (or 2, for that matter) doesn't make a lot of sense to me. I'm also happy to rip out the silhouette value stuff to save on time to be honest. (I feel like this is a bit of an odd use without enough context.) The main reason for including consensus clustering is _skepticism_ about clustering results.

Thoughts?

Reviewer: That makes sense. 

I do wonder if the silhouette juice is worth the squeeze. If you spend more time on the "consensus because clusters can be janky" I think that makes the rhetorical point.

Author: :chopped:

```{r filter_to_clusters, live = TRUE}
filtered_rnaseq_mat <- rnaseq_mat[, samples_in_clusters]
dim(filtered_rnaseq_mat)
```

### Silhouette coefficient

The silhouette coefficient or value is a measure of cluster consistency that ranges from -1 to 1.

> It is calculated on a per-sample basis -- it measures how similar a sample is to the cluster it's in compared to other clusters ([Wikipedia entry for silhouette](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Silhouette_(clustering))).

Reviewer: To be explict: a value close to 1 means it is very similar to it's cluster and -1 would mean it is very dissimilar?

# Set seed for reproducible UMAP results
set.seed(2020)
# umap() expects features (genes) to be columns, so we have to use t()
umap_results <- umap::umap(t(rnaseq_mat[high_variance_index, ]))
```

The UMAP coordinates are in the `layout` element of the list returned by `umap::umap()`.

```{r make_umap_df, live = TRUE}
# Make a data frame of the layout results and join with molecular subtype 
# data frame
umap_plot_df <- data.frame(umap_results$layout) %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Kids_First_Biospecimen_ID") %>%
  inner_join(mb_molecular_subtype_df)
```

Let's make a scatter plot and color our samples by the subtype labels.

```{r umap_scatter}
umap_plot_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = X1, 
             y = X2,
             color = molecular_subtype)) +
  geom_point() +
  colorblindr::scale_color_OkabeIto() +
  theme_bw() +
  xlab("UMAP1") +
  ylab("UMAP2")
```

### PCA 

Now, we'll briefly show you how to use built-in functions for PCA on any matrix that's not in a specialized object for some kind of genomic data.

```{r run_pca}
# Like umap(), prcomp() expects the features to be columns
pca_results <- prcomp(t(rnaseq_mat[high_variance_index, ]), 
                      scale = TRUE)

> # The low-dimensional representation is returned in x

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# The principal component representation is returned in x
```

pca_results$x[1:6, 1:6]
```

Let's get the first 10 PCs ready for plotting.

```{r pca_df, live = TRUE}
pca_plot_df <- data.frame(pca_results$x[, 1:10]) %>%
  tibble::rownames_to_column("Kids_First_Biospecimen_ID") %>%
  inner_join(mb_molecular_subtype_df)
```

And now make a scatterplot of PC1 and PC2.

```{r pca_scatter_1, live = TRUE}
pca_plot_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = PC1, 
             y = PC2,
             color = molecular_subtype)) +
  geom_point() +
  colorblindr::scale_color_OkabeIto() +
  theme_bw() +
  xlab("PC1") +
  ylab("PC2")
```

What about PC2 and PC3?

```{r pca_scatter_2, live = TRUE}
pca_plot_df %>%
  ggplot(aes(x = PC2, 
             y = PC3,
             color = molecular_subtype)) +
  geom_point() +
  colorblindr::scale_color_OkabeIto() +
  theme_bw() +
  xlab("PC2") +
  ylab("PC3")
```

`summary()` will report the proportion of variance explained by each principal component.

> By accessing the `importance` element with `<summary results>$importance`, we can use indexing to only look at the first 10 PCs.

Reviewer: I think this is a good thing to throw in, but it seems oddly placed here. Maybe some more context about why we care would help? How would you use this information to inform plotting?

```{r pca_summary}
# Save summary of the PCA results
pca_summary <- summary(pca_results)
# Importance information for the first 10 PCs
pca_importance <- pca_summary$importance[, 1:10]
pca_importance
```

[`plotly`](https://plotly.com/r/) is a package that allows us to plot interactive 3D scatterplots.

```{r 3d_scatter}
# plot_ly is kind of like ggplot(), but it doesn't require us to specify the 
# aesthetics or types (e.g., geoms) separately in the same way
pca_3d_plot <- plot_ly(data = pca_plot_df,
                       x = ~ PC1,
                       y = ~ PC2,
                       z = ~ PC3,

>                        mode = "markers",

Reviewer: This is redundant with "scatter3d" it seems.
```suggestion
```
